# Plug-In Alternatives

TODO: Write up choosing between solutions. Currently plug-in centric, will
complete once rest of this section has been finished.

## Declarative Alternatives

Plug-ins use imperative logic (how to do). They should be used only
when declarative processes (what to do) will not meet the requirements.

Declarative processes include:

- Business rules
- Flows
- Workflows

As a general rule, consider code the last resort. If a declarative solution is
suitable, use it.

## Length of Operations

Synchronous plug-ins and workflows, should be only be used for short running
actions. This is because:

- They are blocking
- They generally take place in a transaction and lock resources

We may use async plug-ins or workflows for medium length actions as they take
place outside of a transaction. However, note that actions will not be rolled
back in the event of failure.

## Specific Alternatives

### Plug-ins Vs Business Rules

Business rules allow us to write simple server-side logic. However, if the logic
becomes more complex, e.g. where a switch statement is preferable to a lengthy
if, else if, else sequence, we may determine that a plug-in is more appropriate.

### Plug-ins Vs Workflows/Custom Actions

Workflows are a declarative workflow that can run either synchronously or
asynchronously.

The main limitations of workflows in relation to plugins are:

- Run only as a User, where as plugins can run as any licenced user
- They cannot access external data
- There are less triggers

On the other hand, unlike plugins, workflows can be triggered on demand.

### Power Automate Flows

Power Automate flows may be considered an alternative to asynchronous plug-ins.
Note, that they cannot run synchronously.

Power Automate flows have the benefit of not requiring development experience.
They can be less performant than plug-ins but the difference in performance is
becoming increasingly small.

### Formula, Calculated and Roll-Up Columns

Where these fit the use case, they are simple and performant ways to implement
logic. However, they all have limitations and, in the case of rollup columns,
a fairly specific use case.

#### Calculated Columns

These columns are used to perform calculations, we can specify conditions and
actions. In the action section we can define a calculation using data in the
table and related tables.

This feature is being deprecated in favour of formula type columns

#### Formula Columns

Similar to calculated columns, we can perform real time calculations on data in
the table and related tables. Unlike Calculated columns, formulas are expressed
in PowerFx.

Both calculated and formula columns have limitations, for instance:

- Neither can have cyclical references
- Sorting is disabled where there is reference to another table, a logical or
calculated column or Now/UtcNow is used
- There is a maximum depth of 5 and 10 respectively

#### Rollup Columns

These are used to aggregate data from a related table. For instance, an account
table might have a 1:N relationship with an expenses table. We could use a
rollup column to display a total of all related expenses in the account column.

Unlike calculated and formula columns, these run on a schedule (default is every
12 hours)

### Azure Capabilities

Plug-ins and workflows are not designed for batch processing. They should not
be used for long-running or high volume actions. We should offload such
processes to a separate service like an Azure worker role
